---
layout: post
title: 'Progression In Sound Guys #2'
author: Thomas Wood
tagline: 'Progression In Sound Guys #2'
description: Progression In Sound Guys #2
---

<p align="left">
  If you have not yet read my blog <a href="https://twood27897.github.io/pages/blogs/soundguysprogression.md">Progression in Sound Guys #1</a>, I highly recommend going and reading it before continuing on here. If you have already read the previous blog (or have decided not to heed my warning at your own peril!) here is me writing about keeping player created song(s) sounding good-ish in Sound Guys even after they were incentivised to keep acquiring and adding more and more guys to their playspace.<br/><br/>

  <b><i>Keeping Everything Sounding Good</i></b><br/><br/>
  How do you keep a piece of music sounding good when the person making it is being incentivised by a nefarious game developer to keep adding more and more notes to it till it sounds like a piano falling down a flight of stairs? Well, your first thought might be to lock the game dev up and throw away the key - but what if the game dev is you? And what if you don't like being locked up? That was the problem I faced early in the development of Sound Guys. So what did I do? Designed some solutions of course! Nice!<br/><br/>

  First, the real centre of the problem. In Sound Guys, the composer (aka the player) might not be motivated by wanting to create a song. They might just want to play a game, have fun, collect guys, build up a horde of notes and maybe make a song along the way. These players will keep playing the game, collecting guys and building up a horde of notes even if that means making a song that is unlistenable and sounds bad. After all, they can just mute the game and put on Netflix in the background. From playtests early in Sound Guys's development I saw some players would always fill up as much of their sequencer grid as possible, meaning there were no rests in the music and every beat had multiple layers of notes playing. It sounded <i>bad</i>. But these players were maximising their earnings! They were playing in an optimised fashion and making sure they could collect more guys and build up a pile of notes as quickly as possible. All this is not to ignore the players who were motivated by wanting to create music BUT a good game can cater to players with varied motivations, and Sound Guys failed to cater to players who were motivated by optimisation and making the numbers go up. These players would not find an ideal play experience. The game lured them into sabotaging the music to make an optimal grid of note earning guys. So, what solutions did I find to this problem?<br/><br/>

  <i>1. Adding a Cap</i><br/><br/>
  A very clear solution here is to limit the number of guys a player can place in their playspace. Instead of letting players fill all 32 slots in their music sequencer grid, cap them at filling 16 slots at a time. Now, there is space in the music and it is allowed to breathe. It sounds better for it. One of the first solutions I implemented, this approach does however come with its own problems. Some players find arbitrary limitations frustrating. If a player can see empty slots and has guys to place in them, why can't they? Just because of a number cap above the grid? That's annoying! This frustration impacts more players and grows the harsher the cap is. Imagine if there were 32 slots but you could only place 4 guys at once? Not nice! We are left with a double edged sword. I found players stopped overfilling their song with notes (good!), but if the cap was set at a level that meaningfully stopped players from placing lots of guys they would become frustrated (not good!). In the end, the cap still exists in the game but it is soft: players can fill 32 of 48 slots which still amounts to a lot of freedom to make things sound bad.<br/><br/>

  <i>2. Expanding the Grid</i><br/><br/>
  Another approach I took to solve this problem was to to give the players more music to create. By expanding the playspace, players have more room to fill and less chance of overfilling it. With each expansion the player needs more guys to fill up the room they now have. If the balance of obtaining guys and expanding the playspace match correctly, players will always have room to fill and just enough enough guys to fill it. This also alleviates frustration from having a cap on guys that can be placed on the grid, as players regularly have whole new sections to fill with guys and are happy to have filled a section to its cap previously. This approach does not entirely work on its own however. The player also needs to be incentivised to engage with the new space and not just keep placing all their guys in the starting area. I solved this by applying a multiplier to all guys placed in the new area. As the player expands the area to place new guys, they find an opportunity to multiply earnings. Players who are optimising and trying to earn as many notes as possible are now incentivised to keep growing their song! Forever expanding a looping grid, though, is not the best idea. The wait for the highest earning section to come around gets longer as the grid grows. A player won't mind waiting for an 8 second long section to go by before their best section is played again but if the player has a grid they have expanded 10 times and has to wait for 10x8 second long sections to go by before their best section is played, they will be less than happy. Another double edged sword, alleviating the overfilling problem but only until the player reaches the tipping point where the wait for the song loop to get to their best earning section becomes too long and grows frustrating. I knew I wanted to keep the expanding grid in the game, but now I needed a way to stop this tipping point from being reached.<br/><br/>

  <i>3. Cleaning the Slate</i><br/><br/>
  Normally when someone is creating a song, they eventually finish it. At some point, they call it enough, listen to it for a while and then often start on another song. In Sound Guys, players weren't initially incentivised to finish editing, adding to or taking away from the song they were making. The idea of finishing a section of music, however, could help with players overfilling their playspace or continually expanding their grid until it became frustratingly large. If players eventually stopped editing and adding to one section of music and were given a clean slate to start fresh, they could add new guys to their heart's content. Starting and finishing "songs" as they collect new guys. Never overfilling an area as they can move onto another. My immediate thought was to imitate other music making software: simply add buttons to allow players to save grid/song layouts, clear the grid and then load their layouts back in if they wanted to listen to them again. The question then becomes how to gamify the saving/clearing/loading of song layouts and how to make it feel good within the flow of the game. I don't think there is a good answer to this if you hold on to buttons to save/clear/load a single grid. Clearing the grid manually feels to many players like erasing their progress. Taking a big step back and starting from scratch in an unsatisfying fashion. I'm sure there is a way to make saving/clearing/loading work in its more traditional fashion but I decided to pursue another approach that I think works better for Sound Guys. Instead of buttons to save/clear/load a single grid, I created distinct areas each with their own grid that players discover and move between as the game progresses. So, as the player fills up the initial playspace they discover a portal to a new area and are naturally incentivised to start creating a whole new song. Each area has new guys to unlock, new mechanics to explore and a larger grid to fill. Imagine you're working on a song in a piece of music making software, and then you discover a whole new area in the software to make another song! Now that to me sounds pretty fun! By making sure players could always return to any previous areas and still earned notes from old areas even while playing in new ones, I got them to shelf old songs and start new ones without feeling like they lost any progress. I think this solution really shines - relieving the tension between players creating a song that sounds good and players wanting to see constant progress and expansion. Optimising players no longer default to overfilling their songs because they are now presented with the more efficient option of expanding into new areas!<br/><br/>

  <i>4. Combos! Combos! Combos!</i><br/><br/>
  The last solution I'll talk about here sits slightly separate to the rest in my head. Instead of just trying to stop players from placing too many guys down, what if we directly incentivised the player to place guys in a manner that sounds good? Applying simple patterns and rhythms that tame the chaos of placing guys down semi-randomly. I implemented this idea as combos. Three of the same guy in a row or two of one type of guy followed by two of another: players can learn combos over time, and when placing guys to match them, they are rewarded with higher earnings. Each combination directly helps build a more cohesive and directed piece of music! For optimising players trying to maximise earnings, combos push them to organise their guys in pleasant patterns! This solution is pretty clean but it does limits player expression: if every player uses the same patterns and rhythms their music will be less unique. Players who are motivated by the creative expression in the game don't want to feel like they have to abide by combos to progress. This meant it was time to balance opposing player motivations! For combos in Sound Guys, this meant making sure they gave a clear reward but never expecting the player to be using combos when balancing the game. I designed the rate of progress primarily for players who didn't use combos, essentially making sure the pacing of Sound Guys felt good for the slower progressing players first, before tweaking anything that needed it for the faster progressing players who focus on optimisation.<br/><br/>

In the end, as with many design challenges, most approaches have pros and cons. And often the best approach is multi-faceted. For Sound Guys, by implementing a version of all these solutions to alleviate players overfilling and "piano falling down a flight of stairs-ifying" their music, I could balance the solutions against one another to get the most out of their strengths while minimising their weaknesses. Pretty good I think! And after all that, the game is more fun to play! Sweet!<br/><br/>

Play the game: [https://made-by-tom.itch.io/sound-guys](https://made-by-tom.itch.io/sound-guys)<br/>
</p>
